---
type: chapter
issueNo: 5
date: 2020-01-01
title: "Mark 5"
cover: "https://unsplash.it/400/300/?random?BigTest"  # Fix cover art
categories:
    - Mark
tags:
    - heal
    - choose
---

(theme "We can trust Jesus with our spiritual lives")
(vs 1)They came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.

(vs 2)When Jesus left the boat, immediately a man with an evil spirit(tn "Lit: unclean spirit; also known as a demon")  ran from the tombs to meet him.  (vs 3)This man lived in the tombs.(tn "or: the burial caves")

Nobody could tie or restrain him any more--not even using chains!  (vs 4)The people around frequently bound him using shackles and chains, but he tore the chains apart and broke the shackles in pieces. Nobody had the strength to subdue him!

(vs 5)All night, all day he wandered among the burial caves and the mountains; he was constantly shrieking and cutting himself with sharp stones.

(vs 6)When he saw Jesus from far away, he ran and bowed low to him.  (vs 7)He roared, "What do I have to do with you--Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I command you by God, don’t torture me!"

(vs 8)(Jesus had already said, "Come out of the man, you evil(tn "Lit: unclean") spirit!")

(vs 9)Jesus asked him, "What is your name?"

He said to Jesus, "My name is *Legion,*(tn "A legion was between 4000 and 6000 Roman soldiers.  The demons didn't just emphasize that there were a lot of them, but that they were warriors prepared to fight for their kingdom and their king.") for we are many" (vs 10)and begged Jesus over and over not to send them away--out of the country.

(vs 11)Now a large herd of pigs was feeding there on the side of the hill.  (vs 12)And the demons begged Jesus, "Send us into the pigs!  Allow us to enter them!"

(vs 13)Jesus gave them permission.

Then the evil(tn "Lit: unclean") spirits came out of the man, entered the pigs, and the herd of about two thousand pigs rushed down the steep hillside into the sea where they drowned!(sn "🔑 Satan is a liar.  He promises pleasure but those who dedicate their lives to his cause ultimately find destruction.  Jesus is more powerful than Satan and his legions.  Renounce Satan's kingdom and every form of occult practice, dedicate your life completely to God's kingdom, and expectantly trust Jesus.")

(vs 14)Those who fed the pigs ran away in fear, spreading the news in the city and in the country!  And the people came to see what had happened.

(theme "The crowd did not understand who Jesus is...")
(vs 15)The people came to Jesus, saw the man who had been possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind--yes even this man who had the legion of evil spirits--and they were afraid.  (vs 16)The eyewitnesses explained to the crowd what happened to the man who had been demon-possessed and also to the pigs.

(vs 17)Then the crowd begged Jesus to leave their region.

(theme "...But the man who was delivered from the devils did")
(vs 18)As Jesus entered the boat to leave, the man who had been possessed by demons fervently begged to join him so he could be with him.

(vs 19)Jesus wouldn't allow this but replied, "Go to your family and friends; tell them everything the Ruler has done for you and how he had mercy on you!"

(vs 20)So the man began spreading the news all around the ten towns in the region,(tn "Lit. the "region-of-ten-cities" east of the Jordan River") explaining how Jesus had done so much for him!

Everyone was amazed.

(theme "Fruit of expectant trust: A synagogue ruler persuades Jesus to heal his daughter")"
(vs 21)When Jesus returned to the other side in a boat,  a huge crowd joined him by the sea.  (vs 22)And a synagogue ruler named Jairus arrived.

When Jairus saw Jesus he fell at Jesus's feet!

(vs 23)Over and over Jairus begged, "My little daughter is about to die!  Please come!  Please reach out and touch her with your hands so she can be wholly well, so she can live!"(tn "Lit: so she can be wholly well and live")

(vs 24)Jesus went with Jairus.  A very large crowd followed--pressing in on Jesus from every side.

(theme "Fruit of expectant trust: A woman experiences physical healing")
(vs 25)A particular woman in the crowd had blood oozing from her body for twelve years.  (vs 26)Having suffered through many doctors' attempts to heal her she had spent all her money and hadn't gotten any better.  Instead her symptoms grew worse.

(vs 27)But she heard about Jesus.

And she worked her way through the crowd behind Jesus and touched his clothes.  (vs 28)She had said, "If I just touch his clothes, I will be well again!"

(vs 29)Immediately her flow of blood dried up and she realized that she had been healed from her sickness!

(vs 30)And immediately Jesus knew that mighty power had gone out from him so he turned around in the jostling crowd and asked, "Who touched my clothes?"

(vs 31)His students asked, "You see this large crowd pressing against you? And you say, ‘Who touched me?’"

(vs 32)Jesus looked around him, trying to see the woman who had done this.

(vs 33)The woman, realizing what had happened to her, came to Jesus.  Afraid and shaking, she fell down in front of him and told him the whole truth.

(vs 34)Jesus replied, "Daughter, your expectant trust(tn "faith") has made you well.  Go in peace, be wholly well; the scourge of your sickness is gone."

(theme "With Jesus present, anything he wants to do is possible")
(vs 35)While Jesus was still speaking, messengers from the synagogue ruler’s home arrived with news.  "Your daughter is dead. Why bother the Teacher any more?" they said.

(vs 36)But Jesus, when he heard the news, immediately assured the synagogue ruler, "Don’t be afraid, only believe!"  (vs 37)And Jesus asked that only Peter, James, and John the brother of James join him.

(vs 38)When they arrived at the synagogue ruler’s house Jesus saw a chaotic scene of people weeping and sobbing loudly.  (vs 39)Jesus entered the house.

"Why are you making a chaotic scene and weeping--the child isn't dead, but is asleep?" Jesus asked.

(vs 40)They mocked Jesus.

(theme "Jesus touches a dead girl and she lives again")
But after Jesus put them out of the house, he invited the girl's father, mother, and those who were with him to join him; together they entered the place the child was lying.  (vs 41)Taking the child by her hand Jesus said, "Talitha cumi!"  (This translates to, "Little girl, I tell you, get up!")

(vs 42)Immediately the girl got up and walked; she was twelve years old.  And those present were deeply astonished and amazed!

(vs 43)Jesus strictly ordered those present not to tell a single person what had happened and instructed them to give the girl something to eat.
