# The Good News According to Mark

## Chapter 1.

(theme "An invitation; a new beginning; Jesus is the new beginning)
(vs 1)The beginning of the Good News of Jesus the Messiah, the Son of God.(xr "John 1:1-14")

(theme "Choose God’s way; Choose God’s path.")
(vs 2)As it is written in the prophets, *“Look! I am sending my messenger ahead of you; he will prepare your way ahead of time:*  (vs 3)*the voice of one shouting in the wilderness, ‘Make the Lord’s way ready! Make his roads straight!’”*

(vs 4)John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching baptism. This baptism required people to choose God’s path instead of their own(tn "repent"), for forgiveness of preferring selfish pleasure(xr "James 4:1-10") (and the hurt that this causes) instead(tn "sins").

(vs 5)All the country of Judea and all those of Jerusalem left their homes and towns to find John. He baptized them in the Jordan river as they turned to God’s way.  They took responsibility for and began changing(tn "repented") the paths they had chosen that ultimately hurt themselves, God, and others as a consequence of their preference for selfish pleasure(tn "of their sins").

(vs 6)John was clothed with camel’s hair, wore a leather belt around his waist, and ate locusts and wild honey for food.  (vs 7)He preached, saying, “A man will come after me who is more powerful than I am; out of deep respect it would not even be appropriate for me to stoop down and untie his sandal straps! (vs 8)I baptized you in water, but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit--the One Spirit whose purpose is to help you enter and follow God's Way(tn "To be holy is to be uniquely set apart for a special purpose.")(xr "John 14:6").

(theme "Jesus chooses God's road for his life")
(vs 9)In those days Jesus came from Nazareth (a town in Galilee) and John baptized him in the Jordan river.  (vs 10)Immediately when Jesus broke the water’s surface, he saw the heavens splitting apart and the Holy Spirit descending on him in the form of a dove.  (vs 11)A voice came out of the sky, “You are my dearly-loved Son; I am delighted with you!”  (vs 12)Immediately the Holy Spirit drove Jesus away from there into the wilderness.  (vs 13)He stayed in the wilderness forty days, tempted by Satan; he was with the wild animals and the angels were helping him.

(theme "Jesus: Choose loyalty to God's Kingdom over all else")
(vs 14)Now after John was arrested Jesus entered Galilee while preaching the Good News of God’s Kingdom  (vs 15)and saying, “The time is fulfilled and God’s Kingdom is here!  Change your citizenship from your own kingdom to God’s(tn "repent") and believe in the Good News.”

(vs 16)Passing along the sea of Galilee, Jesus saw Simon and Andrew--Simon's brother--casting a net into the sea.  (They were professional(tn "Impled from context") fishermen.)  (vs 17)He said to them, “Follow me, and I will make you into fishers for men.”  (vs 18)Immediately they left their nets and followed him.  (vs 19)Going on a little further from there, Jesus saw James, Zebedee’s son, and John his brother. (Zebedee(tn "Zebedee is not listed here in the original text but is implied to be in the boat from the context"), James, and John were in their boat repairing the fishing nets.)  (vs 20)Immediately Jesus called to James and John and they left their father, Zebedee, in the boat with his hired helpers and followed Jesus!

(theme "The king has authority over his kingdom")
(vs 21)They entered Capernaum, and when the Sabbath day came Jesus immediately entered the synagogue and taught.  (vs 22)Everyone was amazed at his teaching because Jesus taught them like a person with authority, and not like the scribes.  (vs 23)Immediately in their synagogue a man with a an evil spirit(tn "demons were also known as evil or unclean spirits; see verse 32") shouted,  (vs 24)“Ha! What do we have to do with you Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!”  (vs 25)Jesus strongly reprimanded the evil spirit saying, “Be quiet! Come out of him!”  (vs 26)The unclean spirit convulsed the man, shrieked loudly, and came out of him.

(vs 27)They were all amazed! Everyone wondered and discussed, “What is this? A new teaching? Jesus even commands the evil spirits with authority!  And they obey him!”  (vs 28)The news about Jesus immediately spread everywhere in the region known as “Galilee” and its surrounding area.

(vs 29)Immediately, (when they had left the synagogue) they entered Simon and Andrew’s house with James and John.  (vs 30)Now Simon’s wife’s mother lay sick with a fever, and they told Jesus about her immediately.  (vs 31)He came, took her by the hand, and raised her up. The fever immediately left her and she served them.

(vs 32)In the evening after the sun had set people who knew about Jesus brought all who were sick and those who were possessed by demons.  (vs 33)All the city was gathered together at the door!  (vs 34)Jesus healed many who were sick with various diseases and cast out many demons. He didn’t allow the demons to speak, because they knew him.

(theme "Jesus chooses God's way over people's expectations; a sick man doesn't")
(vs 35)Early in the morning while it was still dark Jesus got up, went out, left Capernaum for a deserted place, and prayed there.

(vs 36)Simon and those who were with him searched for Jesus. (vs 37)When they found him they said, “Everyone is looking for you!”  (vs 38)Jesus said to them, “Let’s go somewhere else—into the next towns—so I can preach there too. This is why I came.”  (vs 39)So Jesus visited synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.

(vs 40)A man with the contagious, incurable, fatal skin disease known as(tn "These characteristics were common knowledge in Mark's time") leprosy found Jesus in order to beg: he lowered himself to his knees in front of Jesus and said, “If you want to, you can make me clean!”  (vs 41)With deep compassion, Jesus stretched out his hand and touched the Leper(tn "capitalized because to be a leper also meant belonging to a lower class in society, not just to have the disease known as leprosy"), replying, “I want to!  Be cleansed.”  (vs 42)When Jesus had said this, immediately the leprosy left the man—he was made clean; he was completely healed!

(vs 43)Jesus strictly warned the man (immediately sending him on his way),  (vs 44)“Be careful that you don’t speak a word about this to anybody. Instead, go show yourself to the priest and offer the sacrifices Moses commanded for your cleansing. (This will be a witness to the priests.)”  (vs 45)However, when the man left, he told everybody and spread the news all over!  As a result, Jesus couldn’t enter cities any more but instead stayed outside the cities in the desert.

People still came to Jesus from all around.

## Chapter 2.

(theme "Jesus heals *and forgives* a man who spares no cost to come to him")
(vs 1)A number of days later Jesus returned to Capernaum and the news quickly spread that he was at home.  (vs 2)Immediately a crowd gathered and soon there was no more room, not even around the door.  And Jesus spoke the word to them.

(vs 3)Four people came, carrying a paralyzed man to Jesus.  (vs 4)When they couldn’t get close to Jesus because of the crowd, they broke up and removed the roof above Jesus! Then (with the roof removed), they lowered the mat where the paralyzed man was lying.

(vs 5)Jesus, recognizing their reasonable expectation that he could and would help,(tn "faith")(xr "Hebrews 11:1") said to the paralyzed man, “Son, your selfish choices (tn "sins") are forgiven.”

(vs 6)But some of the religious teachers (who were scribes) were sitting there reasoning silently in their hearts.

(vs 7)“Why does this man defame and insult God like that?  It’s blasphemy!  Who can forgive all of another person's selfish choices(tn "sins") but God alone?” they thought to themselves.

(vs 8)Immediately Jesus perceived in his spirit that they reasoned this way and said to them, “Why do you question and criticize?  (vs 9)Which is easier to tell a paralyzed person:  ‘Your sins are forgiven’ or, ‘Get up, pick up your bed, and walk?’  (vs 10)But to demonstrate that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins—” (Jesus then spoke to the paralyzed man) (vs 11)“—Get up, pick up up your mat, and return home.”

(vs 12)The man got up, immediately picked up his mat, and went out in front of them all! Everyone was amazed and glorified God. “We have never seen anything like this!” they said.

(theme "Jesus is close to people who recognize their own need")
(vs 13)Jesus returned to the seashore; a very large crowd came together, and Jesus taught them.  (vs 14)As he passed the tax office, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus working there. “Follow me,” Jesus said. And Levi got up and followed him.

(vs 15)Later, Jesus was reclining at the meal table in Levi’s house, and many other tax collectors and socially unacceptable “sinners” sat down with Jesus and his disciples; there were many of these kinds of people, and they followed Jesus.  (vs 16)But the scribes and Pharisees (when they saw Jesus eating with the “sinners” and tax collectors) questioned his disciples.

“Why does he eat and drink with tax collectors and ‘sinners’?” these religious teachers asked.

(vs 17)Jesus overheard this and replied, “Those who are healthy don’t need a doctor, but sick people do. I didn’t come to call people who think they already do everything right(tn "the 'righteous', but Jesus is being sarcastic"), but people who prefer pursuing selfish pleasure(tn "sinners") to recognize the hurt that this choice causes and to have a change of heart(tn "to repentance").”

(theme"Religious tradition can't offer a close relationship with Jesus")
(vs 18)John’s disciples and some other religious teachers (known as the Pharisees) were fasting by temporarily going without something to instead focus more clearly on God. They came and asked Jesus, “Why do John’s disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don’t fast?”

(vs 19)Jesus answered, "Can the honored groomsmen at a wedding fast while the bridegroom is with them?  As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they can’t fast.  (vs 20)But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and beginning that day they will fast.

(vs 21)"Nobody uses a piece of cloth that hasn’t shrunk yet to patch an old shrunken piece of clothes. Otherwise when the new patch shrinks, it will tear away from the old cloth, and a worse hole will be made.  (vs 22)No one puts new wine into old, brittle wine-skins. If they did, when the new wine ferments and expands, it would cause the old skins to burst, the wine to pour out, and the skins to be destroyed. Instead, they put new wine into fresh wine-skins.”

(vs 23)On the Sabbath day Jesus and his disciples were going through some grain fields and his disciples began to pick some ears of grain to eat.  (vs 24)The Pharisees said to him, “Look! why do they do what is against (traditional religious) law on the Sabbath day?”

(vs 25)Jesus replied, “Didn’t you ever read what David did when he was needy, when he was hungry?  He, along with those who were with him?  (vs 26)Do you remember how David entered God’s house at the time of Abiathar the high priest, and ate the ceremonial show bread? And do you remember how it is against the Law of Moses for anyone to eat the temple bread except for the priests, but David ate it and gave some to those who were with him too?”  (vs 27)Jesus said to them, “The special Sabbath day was made to meet people's needs, not men and women for the Sabbath.  (vs 28)Therefore the Son of Man is the ruler, even over the Sabbath!”

## Chapter 3.

(vs 1)Jesus entered the synagogue again, and a man was there whose hand was withered.  (vs 2)Jesus's religious enemies watched to see if he would heal the man on the Sabbath day so they could accuse him.

(vs 3)Jesus said to the man whose hand was withered, “Stand up.”  (vs 4)Then Jesus addressed his enemies.

“Does the law intend for a person to do good or to harm others on the Sabbath day? To save a life or to kill?” Jesus asked.

But his enemies were silent.

(vs 5)Jesus looked around at them with anger (out of grief because his enemies' hearts were becoming harder and harder), then said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.” The man stretched it out, and his hand was restored as healthy as the other.

(vs 6)The Pharisees(tn "The religious conservatives of Jesus's day") left and immediately conspired against Jesus with the “Pro King Herod“ political party; together they began planning to kill him.

(theme "The followers, the disciples, and the twelve")
(vs 7)Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples and a huge crowd followed him from Galilee, from Judea, (vs 8)from Jerusalem, from Idumaea, from beyond the Jordan, and from the area around Tyre and Sidon. When he arrived, an enormous crowd gathered made up of who had heard about the amazing things he was doing.

(vs 9)Jesus asked his disciples to keep a little boat nearby because of the crowd pressing toward him.  (vs 10)For he had healed many, and those who had diseases pressed toward him, trying to touch him.  (vs 11)The evil spirits (whenever they saw him) fell down before him shouting, “You are the Son of God!”  (vs 12)But Jesus sternly warned them not to tell people who he was.

(vs 13)Jesus climbed a mountain and called to those he wanted.  And they came.(sn "From the context this appears to be a larger group than the twelve; see Mark 4:10")

(vs 14)He appointed twelve, (that they might be close to him, that he might send them out to preach, (vs 15)and that they would have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons):  (vs 16)Simon, to whom he gave the name Peter;  (vs 17)James the son of Zebedee; and John, the brother of James, (whom he called Boanerges, which means, Sons of Thunder);  (vs 18)Andrew; Philip; Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot;  (vs 19)and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

(theme "Those outside and those inside")
Then Jesus came home.  (vs 20)The great crowd came together again, so that those inside could not eat bread.  (vs 21)When Jesus's friends heard the news they came to take custody of him; they said, “He is insane.”  (vs 22)The religious leaders who were scribes from Jerusalem said, “He has Beelzebul,” and, “By the ruler of the demons he casts out demons.”

(vs 23) Jesus called for them.  Using word-pictures to illustrate his point he asked, “How can Satan cast out Satan?  (vs 24)If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.  (vs 25)If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.  (vs 26)If Satan rebels against himself and is divided he can't stand. He is finished.  (vs 27)Nobody can enter the strong man's house and ransack it unless he first ties up the strong man; then he can ransack his house.  (vs 28)“I say with certainty:  all of peoples' sins will be forgiven, including flagrant disrespect with which they may defame God.  (vs 29)But whoever deliberately defames and slanders actions performed by the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness; their guilt never ends.”  (vs 30)—because they said, “He is possessed by a demon.”

(vs 31) The mother and brothers of Jesus came.  Standing outside, they sent to him, calling him.  (vs 32)A great crowd was sitting around him, and they told him, “Look! your mother, your brothers, and your sisters are outside looking for you.”  (vs 33)He answered them, “Who are my mother and my brothers?”  (vs 34)Looking around at those who sat around him, he said, “Look! my mother and my brothers!  (vs 35)For whoever does the will of God is my brother, my sister, and mother.”

## Chapter 4.

(vs 1)Again he began to teach by the seaside. A huge crowd was gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat in the sea and sat down. All the great crowd were on the land by the sea.  (vs 2)He taught them many things in object lessons, and told them in his teaching,  (vs 3)“Listen! Look! the farmer went out to sow.  (vs 4)As he sowed, some seed fell by the road, and the birds came and devoured it.  (vs 5)Others fell on the rocky ground, where it had little soil, and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil.  (vs 6)When the sun had risen, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.  (vs 7)Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.  (vs 8)Others fell into the good ground and yielded fruit, growing up and increasing. Some produced thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times as much.”  (vs 9)He said, “Whoever has ears to hear, let him carefully take this to heart!”  (vs 10)When he was alone, those who were around him with the twelve asked him about the object lessons.  (vs 11)He said to them, “To you is given the mystery of God’s Kingdom, but to those who are outside, all things are done in object lessons,  (vs 12)that ‘seeing they may see and not perceive, and hearing they may hear and not understand, lest perhaps they should turn again, and their sins should be forgiven them.’”  (vs 13)He said to them, “Don’t you understand this object lesson? How will you understand all of the object lessons?  (vs 14)The farmer sows the word.  (vs 15)The ones by the road are the ones where the word is sown; and when they have heard, immediately Satan comes and takes away the word which has been sown in them.  (vs 16)These in the same way are those who are sown on the rocky places, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy.  (vs 17)They have no root in themselves, but are short-lived. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately they stumble.  (vs 18)Others are those who are sown among the thorns. These are those who have heard the word,  (vs 19)and the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.  (vs 20)Those which were sown on the good ground are those who hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit, some thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times.”  (vs 21)He said to them, “Is a lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed? Isn’t it put on a stand?  (vs 22)For there is nothing hidden except that it should be made known, neither was anything made secret but that it should come to light.  (vs 23)If any man has ears to hear, let him carefully take this to heart!”  (vs 24)He said to them, “Pay careful attention to what you hear. With whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you; and more will be given to you who hear.  (vs 25)For whoever has, to him more will be given; and he who doesn’t have, even what he has will be taken away from him.”  (vs 26)He said, “God’s Kingdom is as if a man should cast seed on the earth,  (vs 27)and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, though he doesn’t know how.  (vs 28)For the earth bears fruit by itself: first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.  (vs 29)But when the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts in the sickle, because the harvest has come.”  (vs 30)He said, “How will we liken God’s Kingdom? Or with what object lesson will we illustrate it?  (vs 31)It’s like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, though it is less than all the seeds that are on the earth,  (vs 32)yet when it is sown, grows up and becomes greater than all the herbs, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under its shadow.”  (vs 33)With many such object lessons he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it.  (vs 34)Without a object lesson he didn’t speak to them; but privately to his own disciples he explained everything.  (vs 35)On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, “Let’s go over to the other side.”  (vs 36)Leaving the great crowd, they took him with them, even as he was, in the boat. Other small boats were also with him.  (vs 37)A big wind-storm rose, and the waves beat into the boat, so much that the boat was nearly swamped.  (vs 38)He himself was in the stern, asleep on the cushion; and they woke him up and asked him, “Teacher, don’t you care that we are dying?”  (vs 39)He awoke and reprimanded the wind, and said to the sea, “Peace! Be still!” The wind abruptly stopped and there was a great calm.  (vs 40)He said to them, “Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?”  (vs 41)They were greatly afraid and said to one another, “Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?” ﻿

## Chapter 5.

(vs 1)They came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.  (vs 2)When he had come out of the boat, immediately a man with an unclean spirit met him out of the tombs.  (vs 3)He lived in the tombs. Nobody could tie or restrain him any more, not even with chains,  (vs 4)because he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been torn apart by him, and the fetters broken in pieces. Nobody had the strength to tame him.  (vs 5)Always, night and day, in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones.  (vs 6)When he saw Jesus from far away, he ran and bowed down to him,  (vs 7)and crying out with a loud voice, he said, “What have I to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I solemnly command you by God, don’t torment me.”  (vs 8)For he said to him, “Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!”  (vs 9)He asked him, “What is your name?” He said to him, “My name is Legion, for we are many.”  (vs 10)He begged him much that he would not send them away out of the country.  (vs 11)Now on the mountainside there was a great herd of pigs feeding.  (vs 12)All the demons begged him, saying, “Send us into the pigs, that we may enter into them.”  (vs 13)At once Jesus gave them permission. The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs. The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea.  (vs 14)Those who fed the pigs fled, and told it in the city and in the country. The people came to see what it was that had happened.  (vs 15)They came to Jesus, and saw him who had been possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind, even him who had the legion; and they were afraid.  (vs 16)Those who saw it declared to them what happened to him who was possessed by demons, and about the pigs.  (vs 17)They began to beg him to depart from their region.  (vs 18)As he was entering into the boat, he who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him.  (vs 19)He didn’t allow him, but said to him, “Go to your house, to your friends, and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you and how he had mercy on you.”  (vs 20)He went his way, and began to proclaim in Decapolis (the “region-of-ten-cities” east of the Jordan River) how Jesus had done great things for him, and everyone was amazed.  (vs 21)When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side, a great great crowd was gathered to him; and he was by the sea.  (vs 22)Look! one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, came; and seeing him, he fell at his feet  (vs 23)and begged him much, saying, “My little daughter is at the point of death. Please come and lay your hands on her, that she may be made healthy, and live.”  (vs 24)He went with him, and a great great crowd followed him, and they pressed upon him on all sides.  (vs 25)A certain woman who had a discharge of blood for twelve years,  (vs 26)and had suffered many things by many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was no better, but rather grew worse,  (vs 27)having heard the things concerning Jesus, came up behind him in the crowd and touched his clothes.  (vs 28)For she said, “If I just touch his clothes, I will be made well.”  (vs 29)Immediately the flow of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction.  (vs 30)Immediately Jesus, perceiving in himself that the power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd and asked, “Who touched my clothes?”  (vs 31)His disciples said to him, “You see the great crowd pressing against you, and you say, ‘Who touched me?’”  (vs 32)He looked around to see her who had done this thing.  (vs 33)But the woman, afraid and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.  (vs 34)He said to her, “Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be cured of your disease.”  (vs 35)While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue ruler’s house, saying, “Your daughter is dead. Why bother the Teacher any more?”  (vs 36)But Jesus, when he heard the message spoken, immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, “Don’t be afraid, only believe.”  (vs 37)He allowed no one to follow him except Peter, James, and John the brother of James.  (vs 38)He came to the synagogue ruler’s house, and he saw an uproar, weeping, and great wailing.  (vs 39)When he had entered in, he said to them, “Why do you make an uproar and weep? The child is not dead, but is asleep.”  (vs 40)They ridiculed him. But he, having put them all out, took the father of the child, her mother, and those who were with him, and went in where the child was lying.  (vs 41)Taking the child by the hand, he said to her, “Talitha cumi!” which means, being interpreted, “Girl, I tell you, get up!”  (vs 42)Immediately the girl rose up and walked, for she was twelve years old. They were amazed with great amazement.  (vs 43)He strictly ordered them that no one should know this, and commanded that something should be given to her to eat. ﻿

## Chapter 6.

(vs 1)He went out from there. He came into his own country, and his disciples followed him.  (vs 2)When the Sabbath had come, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing him were amazed, saying, “Where did this man get these things?” and, “What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such mighty works come about by his hands?  (vs 3)Isn’t this the carpenter, the son of Mary and brother of James, Joses, Judah, and Simon? Aren’t his sisters here with us?” So they were offended at him.  (vs 4)Jesus said to them, “A prophet is not without honour, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house.”  (vs 5)He could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people and healed them.  (vs 6)He was amazed because of their unbelief. He went around the villages teaching.  (vs 7)He called to himself the twelve, and began to send them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.  (vs 8)He commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, except a staff only: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse,  (vs 9)but to wear sandals, and not put on two tunics.  (vs 10)He said to them, “Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there.  (vs 11)Whoever will not receive you nor hear you, as you depart from there, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them. Assuredly, I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city!”  (vs 12)They went out and preached that people should repent.  (vs 13)They cast out many demons, and anointed many with oil who were sick and healed them.  (vs 14)King Herod heard this, for his name had become known, and he said, “John the Baptist has risen from the dead, and therefore these powers are at work in him.”  (vs 15)But others said, “He is Elijah.” Others said, “He is a prophet, or like one of the prophets.”  (vs 16)But Herod, when he heard this, said, “This is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen from the dead.”  (vs 17)For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip’s wife, for he had married her.  (vs 18)For John had said to Herod, “It is not lawful for you to have your brother’s wife.”  (vs 19)Herodias set herself against him and desired to kill him, but she couldn’t,  (vs 20)for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. When he heard him, he did many things, and he heard him gladly.  (vs 21)Then a convenient day came when Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles, the high officers, and the chief men of Galilee.  (vs 22)When the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those sitting with him. The king said to the young lady, “Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you.”  (vs 23)He swore to her, “Whatever you ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom.”  (vs 24)She went out and said to her mother, “What shall I ask?” She said, “The head of John the Baptist.”  (vs 25)She came in immediately with haste to the king and requested, “I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptist on a platter.”  (vs 26)The king was exceedingly sorry, but for the sake of his oaths and of his dinner guests, he didn’t wish to refuse her.  (vs 27)Immediately the king sent out a soldier of his guard and commanded to bring John’s head; and he went and beheaded him in the prison,  (vs 28)and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the young lady; and the young lady gave it to her mother.  (vs 29)When his disciples heard this, they came and took up his corpse and laid it in a tomb.  (vs 30)The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus, and they told him all things, whatever they had done, and whatever they had taught.  (vs 31)He said to them, “Come away into a deserted place, and rest awhile.” For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.  (vs 32)They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves.  (vs 33)They saw them going, and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities. They arrived before them and came together to him.  (vs 34)Jesus came out, saw a great great crowd, and he had compassion on them because they were like sheep without a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things.  (vs 35)When it was late in the day, his disciples came to him and said, “This place is deserted, and it is late in the day.  (vs 36)Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat.”  (vs 37)But he answered them, “You give them something to eat.” They asked him, “Shall we go and buy two hundred days’ denarii—two hundred days’ wages—worth of bread and give them something to eat?”  (vs 38)He said to them, “How many loaves do you have? Go see.” When they knew, they said, “Five, and two fish.”  (vs 39)He commanded them that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass.  (vs 40)They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.  (vs 41)He took the five loaves and the two fish; and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves, and he gave to his disciples to set before them, and he divided the two fish among them all.  (vs 42)They all ate and were filled.  (vs 43)They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish.  (vs 44)Those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.  (vs 45)Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat and go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the great crowd away.  (vs 46)After he had taken leave of them, he went up the mountain to pray.  (vs 47)When evening had come, the boat was in the middle of the sea, and he was alone on the land.  (vs 48)Seeing them distressed in their rowing, for the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea; and he would have passed by them,  (vs 49)but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out;  (vs 50)for they all saw him and were troubled. But he immediately spoke with them and said to them, “Cheer up! I’m here! Don’t be afraid.”  (vs 51)He got into the boat with them; and the wind abruptly stopped, and they were very amazed among themselves, and was amazed;  (vs 52)for they hadn’t understood about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened.  (vs 53)When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret and moored to the shore.  (vs 54)When they had come out of the boat, immediately the people recognized him,  (vs 55)and ran around that whole region, and began to bring those who were sick on their mats to where they heard he was.  (vs 56)Wherever he entered—into villages, or into cities, or into the country—they laid the sick in the marketplaces and begged him that they might just touch the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well. ﻿

## Chapter 7.

(vs 1)Then the Pharisees and some of the scribes gathered together to him, having come from Jerusalem.  (vs 2)Now when they saw some of his disciples eating bread with defiled, that is unwashed, hands, they found fault.  (vs 3)(For the Pharisees and all the Jews don’t eat unless they wash their hands and forearms, holding to the tradition of the elders.  (vs 4)They don’t eat when they come from the marketplace unless they bathe themselves, and there are many other things which they have received to hold to: washings of cups, pitchers, bronze vessels, and couches.)  (vs 5)The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, “Why don’t your disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?”  (vs 6)He answered them, “Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written, ‘This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.  (vs 7)They worship me in vain, teaching the commandments of men as if they were God’s principles and instructions.’  (vs 8)“For you set aside the commandment of God, and hold tightly to the tradition of men—the washing of pitchers and cups, and you do many other such things.”  (vs 9)He said to them, “Full well do you reject the commandment of God, that you may keep your tradition.  (vs 10)For Moses said, ‘Honor your father and your mother;’ and, ‘He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.’  (vs 11)But you say, ‘If a man tells his father or his mother, “Whatever profit you might have received from me is Corban,”’” (that is, he vowed to “give to God” what he would have given to them),  (vs 12)“then you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother,  (vs 13)making void the word of God by your tradition which you have handed down. You do many things like this.”  (vs 14)He called all the great crowd to himself and said to them, “Hear me, all of you, and understand.  (vs 15)There is nothing from outside of the man that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out of the man are those that defile the man.  (vs 16)If anyone has ears to hear, let him carefully take this to heart!”  (vs 17)When he had entered into a house away from the great crowd, his disciples asked him about the object lesson.  (vs 18)He said to them, “Are you also without understanding? Don’t you perceive that whatever goes into the man from outside can’t defile him,  (vs 19)because it doesn’t go into his heart, but into his stomach, then into the latrine, making all foods clean?”  (vs 20)He said, “what proceeds out of the man, that defiles the man.  (vs 21)For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, sexual sins, murders, thefts,  (vs 22)greed, wickedness, deceit, lustful desires, an evil eye, defaming God, pride, and foolishness.  (vs 23)All these evil things come from within and defile the man.”  (vs 24)From there he got up and went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He entered into a house and didn’t want anyone to know it, but he couldn’t escape notice.  (vs 25)For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his feet.  (vs 26)Now the woman was a Greek gentile, a Syrian-Phoenician by race. She begged him that he would cast the demon out of her daughter.  (vs 27)But Jesus said to her, “Let the children be filled first, for it is not appropriate to take the children’s bread and throw it to the dogs.”  (vs 28)But she answered him, “Yes, Lord. Yet even the dogs under the table eat the children’s crumbs.”  (vs 29)He said to her, “Because of this answer, go your way. The demon has gone out of your daughter.”  (vs 30)She went away to her house, and found the child having been laid on the bed, with the demon gone out.  (vs 31)Again he left the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee through the middle of the region of Decapolis (that is, the ten-cities-east-of-Jordan).  (vs 32)They brought to him one who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech. They begged him to lay his hand on him.  (vs 33)He took him aside from the great crowd privately and put his fingers into his ears; and he spat and touched his tongue.  (vs 34)Looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to him, “Ephphatha!” that is, “Be opened!”  (vs 35)Immediately his ears were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was released, and he spoke clearly.  (vs 36)He commanded them that they should tell no one, but the more he commanded them, so much the more widely they proclaimed it.  (vs 37)They were beyond amazed, saying, “He has done all things well. He makes even the deaf hear and the mute speak!” ﻿

## Chapter 8.

(vs 1)In those days, when there was an even larger crowd—and they had nothing to eat. Jesus called his disciples to himself and said to them,  (vs 2)“I have compassion on this great crowd, because they have stayed with me now three days and have nothing to eat.  (vs 3)If I send them to their home without eating they will faint on the way, for some of them have come a long way.”  (vs 4)His disciples answered him, “From where could one satisfy these people with bread here in a deserted place?”  (vs 5)He asked them, “How many loaves do you have?” They said, “Seven.”  (vs 6)He commanded the great crowd to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven loaves. Having given thanks, he broke them and gave them to his disciples to serve, and they served the crowd.  (vs 7)They also had a few small fish. Having blessed them, he said to serve these also.  (vs 8)Everyone ate until they were full and the disciples gathered seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over.  (vs 9)Those who had eaten were about four thousand. Then Jesus sent them away.  (vs 10)Immediately he entered into the boat with his disciples and came into the region of Dalmanutha.  (vs 11)The Pharisees came out and began to question him, requesting from him a sign from heaven to test him.  (vs 12)He sighed deeply in his spirit and said, “Why does this generation ask for a sign? With certainty I tell you, no sign will be given to this generation.”  (vs 13)He left them, and again entering into the boat, left for the other side.  (vs 14)They forgot to take bread; and they didn’t have more than one loaf in the boat with them.  (vs 15)He warned them, saying, “Pay careful attention: beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod.”  (vs 16)They reasoned with one another, saying, “It’s because we have no bread.”  (vs 17)Jesus, perceiving it, said to them, “Why do you reason that it’s because you have no bread? Don’t you perceive yet or understand? Is your heart still hardened?  (vs 18)*Having eyes, don’t you see? Having ears, don’t you hear?* Don’t you remember?  (vs 19)When I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?” They told him, “Twelve.”  (vs 20)“When the seven loaves fed the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?” They told him, “Seven.”  (vs 21)He asked them, “Don’t you understand yet?”  (vs 22)He came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to him and begged him to touch him.  (vs 23)He took hold of the blind man by the hand, and brought him out of the village. When he had spat on his eyes, and laid his hands on him, he asked him if he saw anything.  (vs 24)He looked up, and said, “I see men, but I see them like walking trees.”  (vs 25)Then again he laid his hands on his eyes. He looked intently, and was restored, and saw everyone clearly.  (vs 26)He sent him away to his house, saying, “Don’t enter into the village, nor tell anyone in the village.”  (vs 27)Jesus went out, with his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples, “Who do men say that I am?”  (vs 28)They told him, “John the Baptist, and others say Elijah, but others, one of the prophets.”  (vs 29)He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered, “You are the Messiah.”  (vs 30)He commanded them that they should tell no one about him.  (vs 31)He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.  (vs 32)He spoke to them openly. Peter took him and began to reprimand him.  (vs 33)But he, turning around and seeing his disciples, reprimanded Peter, and said, “Get behind me, Satan! For you have in mind not the things of God, but the things of men.”  (vs 34)He called the great crowd to himself with his disciples and said to them, “Whoever wants to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.  (vs 35)For whoever wants to save his life will lose it; and whoever will lose his life for my sake and the sake of the Good News will save it.  (vs 36)For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his life?  (vs 37)For what will a man give in exchange for his life?  (vs 38)For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him when he comes in his Father’s glory with the holy angels.” ﻿

## Chapter 9.

(vs 1)He said to them, “With certainty I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste death until they see God’s Kingdom come with power.”  (vs 2)After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up onto a high mountain privately by themselves, and he was changed into another form in front of them.  (vs 3)His clothing became glistening, amazingly pure white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth can whiten them.  (vs 4)Elijah and Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.  (vs 5)Peter answered Jesus, “Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let’s make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”  (vs 6)For he didn’t know what to say, for they were very afraid.  (vs 7)A cloud came, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.”  (vs 8)Suddenly looking around, they saw no one with them any more, except Jesus only.  (vs 9)As they were coming down from the mountain, he commanded them that they should tell no one the things they had seen, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.  (vs 10)They kept this saying to themselves, questioning what the “rising from the dead” meant.  (vs 11)They asked him, saying, “Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?”  (vs 12)He said to them, “Yes! Elijah comes first, and restores all things. (Yet why do the scriptures say regarding the Son of Man, that he should suffer many things and be treated with utter contempt?)  (vs 13)But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to, even as it is written about him.”  (vs 14)Coming to the disciples, he saw a great great crowd around them, and scribes questioning them.  (vs 15)Immediately all the great crowd, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him, greeted him.  (vs 16)He asked the scribes, “What are you asking them?”  (vs 17)One of the people answered, “Teacher, I brought my son, who has a mute spirit;  (vs 18)and wherever it seizes him, it throws him down; and he foams at the mouth, grinds his teeth, and becomes rigid. I asked your disciples to cast it out, and they weren’t able.”  (vs 19)He answered him, “Unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him to me.”  (vs 20)They brought him to him, and when he saw him, immediately the spirit convulsed him and he fell on the ground, writhing and foaming at the mouth.  (vs 21)He asked his father, “How long has it been since this has been happening to him?” He said, “From childhood.  (vs 22)Often it has cast him both into the fire and into the water to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have compassion on us and help us.”  (vs 23)Jesus said to him, “If you can believe, all things are possible to him who believes.”  (vs 24)Immediately the father of the child cried out with tears, “I believe. Help my unbelief!”  (vs 25)When Jesus saw that people were running to join the crowd, he reprimanded the unclean spirit, saying to him, “You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him again!”  (vs 26)After crying out and convulsing him greatly, it came out of him. The boy became like one dead, so much that most of them said, “He is dead.”  (vs 27)But Jesus took him by the hand and raised him up; and he got up.  (vs 28)When he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, “Why couldn’t we cast it out?”  (vs 29)He said to them, “This kind cannot come out but by prayer and fasting.”  (vs 30)They went out from there and passed through Galilee. He didn’t want anyone to know it,  (vs 31)for he was teaching his disciples, and said to them, “The Son of Man is being betrayed into the hands of his enemies, and they will kill him; and when he is killed, on the third day he will rise again.”  (vs 32)But they didn’t understand the saying, and were afraid to ask him.  (vs 33)He came to Capernaum, and when he was in the house he asked them, “What were you arguing among yourselves on the way?”  (vs 34)But they were silent, for they had disputed with one another on the way about who was the greatest.  (vs 35)He sat down and called the twelve; and he said to them, “If any man wants to be first, he shall be last of all, and servant of all.”  (vs 36)He took a little child and set him in the middle of them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them,  (vs 37)“Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me; and whoever receives me, doesn’t receive me, but him who sent me.”  (vs 38)John said to him, “Teacher, we saw someone who doesn’t follow us casting out demons in your name; and we forbade him, because he doesn’t follow us.”  (vs 39)But Jesus said, “Don’t forbid him, for there is no one who will do a mighty work in my name and be able to speak evil of me soon afterward.  (vs 40)For whoever is not against us is on our side.  (vs 41)For whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my name because you belong to the Messiah, most certainly I tell you, he will in no way lose his reward.  (vs 42)“Whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if he were thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around his neck.  (vs 43)If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than having your two hands to go into Gehenna, into the unquenchable fire,  (vs 44)‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’  (vs 45)If your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame, rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna, into the fire that will never be quenched—  (vs 46)‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’  (vs 47)If your eye causes you to stumble, throw it out. It is better for you to enter into God’s Kingdom with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire,  (vs 48)‘where their worm doesn’t die, and the fire is not quenched.’  (vs 49)For everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt.  (vs 50)Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its flavor, how can a person add its character back? Have salt’s qualities in yourselves, and be at peace with one another.” ﻿

## Chapter 10.

(vs 1)He got up from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan. Large crowds came together to him again. And again—as he usually did—he taught them.  (vs 2)Pharisees came to him testing him, and asked him, “Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?”  (vs 3)He answered, “What did Moses command you?”  (vs 4)They said, “Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written, and to divorce her.”  (vs 5)But Jesus said to them, “For your hardness of heart, he wrote you this commandment.  (vs 6)But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.  (vs 7)For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife,  (vs 8)and the two will become one flesh, so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.  (vs 9)What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate.”  (vs 10)In the house, his disciples asked him again about the same matter.  (vs 11)He said to them, “Whoever divorces his wife and marries another commits adultery against her.  (vs 12)If a woman herself divorces her husband and marries another, she commits adultery.”  (vs 13)They were bringing to him little children, that he should touch them, but the disciples reprimanded those who were bringing them.  (vs 14)But when Jesus saw it, indignation rose in his heart and he said to his disciples, “Allow the little children to come to me! Don’t forbid them, for God’s Kingdom belongs to such as these.  (vs 15)I tell you with complete certainty, whoever will not receive God’s Kingdom like a little child, he will in no way enter into it.”  (vs 16)He took them in his arms and blessed them, laying his hands on them.  (vs 17)As he was starting on the way to Jerusalem, a man ran to him, knelt before him, and asked him, “Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?”  (vs 18)Jesus said to him, “Why do you call me good? No one is good except one—God.  (vs 19)You know the commandments: ‘Do not murder,’ ‘Do not commit adultery,’ ‘Do not steal,’ ‘Do not give false testimony,’ ‘Do not cheat anyone,’ ‘Honor your father and mother.’”  (vs 20)He said to him, “Teacher, I have observed all these things from my youth.”  (vs 21)Jesus looking at him loved him, and said to him, “One thing you lack. Go, sell whatever you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, taking up the cross.”  (vs 22)But his face fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful, for he was one who had great possessions.  (vs 23)Jesus looked around and said to his disciples, “How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into God’s Kingdom!”  (vs 24)The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again, “Children, how hard it is for those who trust in riches to enter into God’s Kingdom!  (vs 25)It is easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into God’s Kingdom.”  (vs 26)They were exceedingly amazed, saying to him, “Then who can be saved?”  (vs 27)Jesus, looking at them, said, “With men it is impossible, but not with God, for all things are possible with God.”  (vs 28)Peter began to tell him, “Look! we have left all and have followed you.”  (vs 29)Jesus said, “With certainty I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and for the sake of the Good News,  (vs 30)but he will receive one hundred times more now in this time: houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and land, with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life.  (vs 31)But many who are first will be last, and the last first.”  (vs 32)They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going in front of them, and the disciples were amazed; and those who followed were afraid. He again took the twelve aside and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him.  (vs 33)“Look! we are going up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles.  (vs 34)They will mock him, spit on him, scourge him, and kill him. On the third day he will rise again.”  (vs 35)James and John, the sons of Zebedee, approached him, saying, “Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we will ask.”  (vs 36)He said to them, “What do you want me to do for you?”  (vs 37)They said to him, “Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right hand and one at your left hand, in your glory.”  (vs 38)But Jesus said to them, “You don’t know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?”  (vs 39)They said to him, “We are able.” Jesus said to them, “You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink, and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with;  (vs 40)but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared.”  (vs 41)When the ten heard it, they began to be indignant towards James and John.  (vs 42)Jesus summoned them and said to them, “You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them.  (vs 43)But it shall not be so among you, but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant.  (vs 44)Whoever of you wants to become first among you shall offer himself as slave of all.  (vs 45)For the Son of Man also came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.”  (vs 46)They came to Jericho. As he went out from Jericho with his disciples and a great great crowd, a blind beggar named Bartimaeus (son of Timaeus), was sitting by the road.  (vs 47)When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!”  (vs 48)Many reprimanded him, that he should be quiet, but he cried out much more, “You son of David, have mercy on me!”  (vs 49)Jesus stood still and said, “Call him.” They called the blind man, saying to him, “Cheer up! Get up. He is calling you!”  (vs 50)He, casting away his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.  (vs 51)Jesus asked him, “What do you want me to do for you?” The blind man said to him, “Rabboni, that I may see again.”  (vs 52)Jesus said to him, “Go your way. Your faith has made you well.” Immediately he received his sight and followed Jesus on the way. ﻿

## Chapter 11.

(vs 1)When they approached Jerusalem, they came to Bethsphage and Bethany at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples  (vs 2)and said to them, “Go your way into the village that is opposite you. Immediately as you enter into it, you will find a young donkey tied, on which no one has sat. Untie him and bring him.  (vs 3)If anyone asks you, ‘Why are you doing this?’ say, ‘The Lord needs him;’ and immediately he will send him back here.”  (vs 4)They went away, and found a young donkey tied at the door outside in the open street, and they untied him.  (vs 5)Some of those who stood there asked them, “What are you doing, untying the young donkey?”  (vs 6)They said to them just as Jesus had said, and they let them go.  (vs 7)They brought the young donkey to Jesus and threw their garments on it, and Jesus sat on it.  (vs 8)Many spread their garments on the way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees and spreading them on the road.  (vs 9)Those who went in front and those who followed cried out, “Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!  (vs 10)Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!”  (vs 11)Jesus entered into the temple in Jerusalem. When he had looked around at everything, because it was evening he left Jerusalem and returned to Bethany with the twelve.  (vs 12)The next day, when they had left Bethany’s town boundaries he was hungry.  (vs 13)Seeing a fig tree far away off having leaves, he came to see if perhaps he might find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.  (vs 14)Jesus told it, “May no one ever eat fruit from you again!” and his disciples heard it.  (vs 15)They came to Jerusalem, and Jesus entered into the temple and began to throw out those who sold and those who bought in the temple, and overthrew the money changers’ tables and the seats of those who sold the doves.  (vs 16)He would not allow anyone to carry merchandise through the temple.  (vs 17)He taught, saying to them, “Isn’t it written, *‘My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations?’* But you have made it a den of robbers!”  (vs 18)The chief priests and the scribes heard it, and searched for how they could destroy him. For they feared him because all the great crowd was amazed at his teaching.  (vs 19)When evening came, he went out of the city.  (vs 20)As they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots.  (vs 21)Peter, remembering, said to him, “Rabbi, look! The fig tree which you cursed has withered away.”  (vs 22)Jesus answered them, “Have faith in God.  (vs 23)For most certainly I tell you, whoever may tell this mountain, ‘Be taken up and cast into the sea,’ and doesn’t doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says is happening, he shall have whatever he says.  (vs 24)Therefore I tell you, all things whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received them, and you shall have them.  (vs 25)Whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against anyone; so that your Father, who is in heaven, may also forgive you your wrongdoings.  (vs 26)But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your wrongdoings.”  (vs 27)They came again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders came to him,  (vs 28)and they began saying to him, “By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?”  (vs 29)Jesus said to them, “I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.  (vs 30)The baptism of John—was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me.”  (vs 31)They reasoned with themselves, saying, “If we should say, ‘From heaven;’ he will say, ‘Why then did you not believe him?’  (vs 32)If we should say, ‘From men’”—they feared the people, for all held John to really be a prophet.  (vs 33)They answered Jesus, “We don’t know.” Jesus said to them, “Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things.” ﻿

## Chapter 12.

(vs 1)He began to speak to them in object lessons. “A man planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a pit for the wine press, built a tower, rented it out to a farmer, and went into another country.  (vs 2)When it was time, he sent a servant to the farmer to get from the farmer his share of the fruit of the vineyard.  (vs 3)They took him, beat him, and sent him away empty.  (vs 4)Again, he sent another servant to them; and they threw stones at him, wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully treated.  (vs 5)Again he sent another, and they killed him, and many others, beating some, and killing some.  (vs 6)Therefore still having one, his beloved son, he sent him last to them, saying, ‘They will respect my son.’  (vs 7)But those farmers said among themselves, ‘This is the heir. Come, let’s kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.’  (vs 8)They took him, killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.  (vs 9)What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.  (vs 10)Haven’t you even read this Scripture: *‘The stone which the builders rejected was made the head of the corner. *  (vs 11)*This was from the Lord. It is marvelous in our eyes’?”*  (vs 12)They tried to seize him, but they feared the great crowd; for they perceived that he spoke the object lesson against them. They left him and went away.  (vs 13)They sent some of the Pharisees and the Herodians to him, that they might trap him with words.  (vs 14)When they had come, they asked him, “Teacher, we know that you are honest, and don’t defer to anyone; for you aren’t partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?  (vs 15)Shall we give, or shall we not give?” But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, “Why do you test me? Bring me Roman coin (a denarius), that I may see it.”  (vs 16)They brought it. He said to them, “Whose is this image and inscription?” They said to him, “Caesar’s.”  (vs 17)Jesus answered them, “Give Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” They were greatly amazed at him.  (vs 18)Some Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection, came to him. They asked him, saying,  (vs 19)“Teacher, Moses wrote to us, ‘If a man’s brother dies and leaves a wife behind him, and leaves no children, that his brother should take his wife and raise up offspring for his brother.’  (vs 20)There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and dying left no offspring.  (vs 21)The second took her, and died, leaving no children behind him. The third likewise;  (vs 22)and the seven took her and left no children. Last of all the woman also died.  (vs 23)In the resurrection, when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as a wife.”  (vs 24)Jesus answered them, “Isn’t this because you are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God?  (vs 25)For when they will rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.  (vs 26)But about the dead, that they are raised: haven’t you read in the book of Moses in the story about the burning bush, how God spoke to him, saying, ‘I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob’?  (vs 27)He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are badly mistaken!”  (vs 28)One of the scribes came and heard them questioning together, and knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, “Which commandment is the greatest of all?”  (vs 29)Jesus answered, “The greatest is: *‘Hear, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one. *  (vs 30)*You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your mind, and with all your strength.’* This is the first commandment.  (vs 31)The second is like this: *‘You shall love your neighbor as yourself.’* There is no other commandment greater than these.”  (vs 32)The scribe said to him, “Truly, teacher, you have said well that he is one, and there is none other but he;  (vs 33)and to love him with all the heart, with all the understanding, all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more important than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.”  (vs 34)When Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said to him, “You are not far from God’s Kingdom.” No one dared ask him any question after that.  (vs 35)Jesus responded as he taught in the temple, “How is it that the scribes say that the Messiah is the son of David?  (vs 36)For David himself said in the Holy Spirit, *‘The Lord said to my Lord, “Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.”’*  (vs 37)Therefore David himself calls him Lord, so how can he be his son?” The common people heard him gladly.  (vs 38)In his teaching he said to them, “Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and to be greeted in the marketplaces,  (vs 39)and to have the best seats in the synagogues and the best places at feasts,  (vs 40)those who devour widows’ houses, and for a pretense make long prayers. These will receive greater condemnation.”  (vs 41)Jesus sat down opposite the treasury and saw how the great crowd cast money into the treasury. Many who were rich cast in much.  (vs 42)A poor widow came and she cast in two small brass coins (which equal a quadrans coin).  (vs 43)Jesus called his disciples close and said to them, “With certainty I tell you, this poor widow gave more than all those who are giving into the treasury,  (vs 44)for they all gave out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, gave all that she had to live on.” ﻿

## Chapter 13.

(vs 1)As he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him, “Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings!”  (vs 2)Jesus said to him, “Do you see these great buildings? There will not be left here one stone on another, which will not be thrown down.”  (vs 3)As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately,  (vs 4)“Tell us, when will these things happen? What is the sign that these things are all about to be fulfilled?”  (vs 5)Jesus replied, “Be careful that no one misleads you.  (vs 6)For many will come in my name, saying, ‘I am he!’ and will mislead many.  (vs 7)“When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, don’t be troubled. For those must happen, but the end is not yet.  (vs 8)For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places. There will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginning of birth pains.  (vs 9)“But watch yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils. You will be beaten in synagogues. You will stand before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them.  (vs 10)The Good News must first be preached to all the nations.  (vs 11)When they lead you away and deliver you up, don’t be anxious beforehand or premeditate what you will say, but say whatever will be given you in that hour. For it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.  (vs 12)“Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents and cause them to be put to death.  (vs 13)You will be hated by all men for my name’s sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved.  (vs 14)“But when you see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not” (let the reader understand), “then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains,  (vs 15)and let the person on the housetop not go down, enter, or take anything out of his house.  (vs 16)The person out in the field must not return even to get his coat.  (vs 17)How terrible it will be for women who are pregnant or who nurse babies in those days!  (vs 18)Pray that your escape won’t be in the winter.  (vs 19)For in those days there will be oppression unlike anyone has known from the earliest beginning of God’s creation until now. And it will never will be that great again.  (vs 20)Unless the Lord had shortened the days, nobody would have been saved. But for the sake of the chosen ones—whom the Lord himself picked out—he shortened the days.  (vs 21)Then if anyone tells you, ‘Look, here is the Messiah!’ or, ‘Look, there!’ don’t believe it.  (vs 22)For false “messiahs” and false “prophets” will arise, will show signs and wonders, and will try to lead—if possible—even the chosen ones down their false and corrupt path.  (vs 23)But you watch. “Look! I have told you about all these things beforehand.  (vs 24)But in those days, after that oppression, *the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, *  (vs 25)the stars will be falling from the sky, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.  (vs 26)Then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory.  (vs 27)Then he will send out his angels, and will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the sky.  (vs 28)“Now learn this object lesson from the fig tree: When its branch becomes tender and produces its leaves, you know that its summer is near;  (vs 29)even so you also, when you see these things happening, know that your summer is near, at the doors.  (vs 30)Most certainly I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things happen.  (vs 31)Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.  (vs 32)“But of that day or that hour no one knows—not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.  (vs 33)Watch, keep alert, and pray; for you don’t know when the time is.  (vs 34)“It is like a man traveling to another country, having left his house and given authority to each of his servants to do his work, and having also commanded the doorkeeper to keep watch.  (vs 35)Therefore watch, for you don’t know when the lord of the house is coming—whether at evening, at midnight, when the rooster crows, or in the morning;  (vs 36)Otherwise when he comes suddenly he might find you sleeping.  (vs 37)What I tell you, I tell all: Watch!” ﻿

## Chapter 14.

(vs 1)It was now two days before the Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might seize him by deception and kill him.  (vs 2)For they said, “Not during the feast, because there might be a riot among the people.”  (vs 3)Meanwhile Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon (a man who previously had been a leper). As Jesus sat, eating at the table, a woman came having a beautiful alabaster jar of expensive aromatic oil made using pure nard. She broke the jar and poured it over his head.  (vs 4)But there were some who were indignant among themselves, saying, “Why has this expensive perfumed oil been wasted?  (vs 5)For this might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii (an entire year’s wages) and given to the poor!” So they criticized her.  (vs 6)But Jesus said, “Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for me.  (vs 7)For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want to, you can do them good; but you will not always have me.  (vs 8)She has done what she could and has anointed my body for burial ahead of time.  (vs 9)With certainty I tell you, wherever this Good News is preached throughout the whole world, what this woman has done will be remembered and retold in memory of her.”  (vs 10)Then Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, found to the chief priests in order to discuss how he could betray Jesus to them.  (vs 11)For their part, when they heard this, they were glad and promised to give him money. And Judas began searching for an opportune moment to betray Jesus.  (vs 12)On the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, his disciples asked him, “Where do you want us to go and prepare that you may eat the Passover?”  (vs 13)He sent two of his disciples and said to them, “Enter the city, and a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him,  (vs 14)and wherever he enters, tell the master of the house, ‘The Teacher says, “Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?”’  (vs 15)He will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready. Make preparations there.”  (vs 16)Jesus’s disciples entered the city and found things exactly the way Jesus had told them, and they prepared the Passover.  (vs 17)When it was evening he arrived with the twelve.  (vs 18)As they at the table eating, Jesus said, “With certainty I tell you, one of you will betray me—even one who eats with me here.”  (vs 19)They became full of grief, and began to ask him one by one, “Surely not I?” And another said, “Surely not I?”  (vs 20)Jesus answered, “It is one of you twelve who eats from this dish along with me.  (vs 21)For the Son of Man must die in the same way as it was written in the Scriptures. But intense grieving misery will come to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for that man if he had not been born.”  (vs 22)As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed it, he broke it and gave to them, and said, “Take, eat. This is my body.”  (vs 23)He took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to them. They all drank of it.  (vs 24)He said to them, “This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many.  (vs 25)With certainty I tell you, I will never drink of the fruit of the vine until that day when I drink it again in God’s Kingdom.”  (vs 26)When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.  (vs 27)Jesus said to them, “All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, *‘I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.’*  (vs 28)However, after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.”  (vs 29)But Peter said to him, “Even if all other people desert you, I will not.”  (vs 30)Jesus said to him, “With certainty I tell you that you today that even this night—before the rooster crows twice—you will deny me three times.”  (vs 31)But Peter protested all the more, “If I must die with you, I will not deny you!” They all vowed the same thing.  (vs 32)They came to a place which was named Gethsemane. He said to his disciples, “Sit here while I pray.”  (vs 33)He took with him Peter, James, and John, and became greatly troubled and distressed.  (vs 34)He said to them, “My heart grieves so deeply—even to the point of death! Stay here with me and watch.”  (vs 35)He went forward a little, and fell to the ground, and prayed that if it were possible, the terrible hour prepared for him might pass him by.  (vs 36)He prayed, “Daddy! Father! All things are possible to you. Please remove this cup from me. However, not what I desire, but what you desire.”  (vs 37)He came back and finding them sleeping said to Peter, “Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn’t you watch one hour?  (vs 38)Watch and pray, that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit is very willing, but ‘human strength’ is weak.”  (vs 39)Again he went away and prayed, saying the same words.  (vs 40)Again he returned and found them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy; and they didn’t know how to reply to him.  (vs 41)He came the third time and said to them, “Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough. The time has come. Look! the Son of Man is being betrayed into the power of evil people.  (vs 42)Get up! Let’s get going. Look! The one who is betraying me has arrived.”  (vs 43)Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, came—and with him a great crowd with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders.  (vs 44)Now the one who betrayed Jesus had told them to watch for this signal: He said, “Whoever I kiss, he is the one. Arrest him and lead him away safely.”  (vs 45)When Judas arrived, immediately he came up to Jesus and said, “Rabbi! Rabbi!” and kissed him.  (vs 46)They grabbed him and seized him.  (vs 47)But a person who stood by drew his sword, struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.  (vs 48)Jesus answered them, “Have you come as if you were chasing a robber and needed swords and clubs to seize me?  (vs 49)I was with you in the temple every day teaching, and you didn’t arrest me. But this has happened so that the Scriptures could be fulfilled.”  (vs 50)They all his disciples abandoned him and fled.  (vs 51)A certain young man followed him and all he was weaaring was a linen cloth thrown around his naked body. The mob grabbed him!  (vs 52)But he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked.  (vs 53)They led Jesus away to the high priest’s house where all the chief priests, elders, and scribes were joining them.  (vs 54)Peter had followed Jesus from a distance, until he came into the courtyard of the high priest’s home. He sat along with the officers, warming himself in the light of the fire.  (vs 55)Now the chief priests and the whole council searched for witnesses who could testify against Jesus so they could put him to death. But they couldn’t find any  (vs 56)because although many people gave false testimony against him, their stories didn’t agree with each other!  (vs 57)Some stood before those assembled and offered this false testimony against Jesus:  (vs 58)“We heard him say, ‘I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands.’”  (vs 59)But they even disagreed in their testimony about this!  (vs 60)Finally the high priest stood up in the middle of the assembly and asked Jesus, “Don’t you have anything to say? How will you respond to these accusations against you?”  (vs 61)But he stayed quiet, and didn’t answer. Again the high priest asked Jesus, “Are you the Messiah, the Son of the Blessed One?”  (vs 62)Jesus said, *“I Am.* And you will see the Son of Man sitting in the seat of highest power and authority and coming with the clouds of the sky.”  (vs 63)The high priest tore his clothes and said, “Do we need witnesses any longer?  (vs 64)You have heard him defaming God by claiming to be God himself! What do you think?” They unanimously declared Jesus guilty, fully deserving death.  (vs 65)Some began to spit on him, to cover his face, to beat him with fists, and to order him, “Prophesy!” Then the officers struck him with the palms of their hands.  (vs 66)As Peter was in the courtyard below, one of the maids of the high priest came.  (vs 67)When she noticed Peter warming himself, she looked intently at him and said, “You were also with the Nazarene, Jesus!”  (vs 68)But he denied it! “I don’t know or understand what you are saying”, Peter answered. He went out on the porch, and the rooster crowed.  (vs 69)The maid saw him on the porch and insisted again to the other onlookers, “This man is one of them!”  (vs 70)But Peter again denied it! And just a little bit later those who were milling around said to Peter, “You must be one of them because you are from Galilee! Your accent gives you away!”  (vs 71)But Peter began to curse and to swear, “I don’t know this man you’re talking about!”  (vs 72)Then the rooster crowed the second time. Peter remembered that Jesus had told him, “Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times.” And Peter broke down weeping. ﻿

## Chapter 15.

(vs 1)Immediately in the morning the chief priests with the elders, scribes, and the whole council consulted together, bound Jesus, carried him away, and transferred him as a prisoner to Pilate. Pilate was the region’s Roman governor.  (vs 2)Pilate asked Jesus, “Are you the King of the Jews?” He answered, “So you say.”  (vs 3)The chief priests accused him of many crimes.  (vs 4)Pilate asked him again, “Don’t you have any answers for them? They are accusing you of many crimes!”  (vs 5)Jesus didn’t answer. And Pilate was amazed.  (vs 6)Now at the feast Pilate customarily pardoned and released one prisoner—one who they requested by name.  (vs 7)And Pilate was holding an insurgent named Barabbas (his name means “Son of the Father”) along with others who rebelled along with him. They were all murderers.  (vs 8)The great crowd roared loudly for Pilate to release a prisoner as he customarily did during the feast.  (vs 9)Pilate answered, “Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?”  (vs 10)(because Pilate sensed that the chief priests had really arrested Jesus because they were jealous of him).  (vs 11)But the chief priests riled up the mob so that they all demanded that Pilate release Barabbas to them instead.  (vs 12)Pilate responded, “Then what should I do to the man you call the King of the Jews?”  (vs 13)They roared back, “Crucify him!”  (vs 14)Pilate said to them, “Why? What crime did he commit?” But they roared back even louder, “Crucify him!”  (vs 15)Pilate wanted to appease the mob, so he released Barabbas to them. And after he flogged Jesus with a lead-tipped whip, Pilate released him to Roman soldiers to be crucified.  (vs 16)The soldiers led Jesus away to the great courtyard (named the Praetorium), then called for the entire regiment.  (vs 17)The regiment clothed Jesus in royal purple, weaved a crown made of thorns, and pressed it on his head.  (vs 18)They saluteed and taunted him, saying “Hail, King of the Jews!”  (vs 19)They struck his head with a stick that came from a reed. They spat on him. And bowing their knees, they “paid homage” to him.  (vs 20)When they had mocked him in these ways, they took the purple robe off him and dressed him in his own clothes. And the soldiers led Jesus out to crucify him.  (vs 21)On the way, the soldiers chose a man who happened to be passing by on his way from the country (Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus). They forced him to join them and carry Jesus’s cross.  (vs 22)They brought Jesus to the place called Golgotha. This name means, “Place of the skull.”  (vs 23)The soldiers offered him wine drugged with myrrh, but Jesus wouldn’t drink it.  (vs 24)They crucified Jesus—they nailed him to a cross. And they gambled together to decide who would get each piece of his clothes.  (vs 25)It was the third hour—about 9 o’clock—when they crucified Jesus.  (vs 26)A sign with his crime was fastened above him. It read, “THE KING OF THE JEWS.”  (vs 27)Along with Jesus, the soldiers crucified two robbers—one on his right hand, and one to his left.  (vs 28)\[This fulfilled the Scripture that says, *“He was counted alongside those who live lawlessly.”\]*  (vs 29)Those who passed by defamed him, shook their heads and hurled insults, “Ha! You who destroy the temple and build it in three days,  (vs 30)save yourself! Come down from the cross!”  (vs 31)Similarly, the chief priests mocked him among themselves and with the scribes. They said, “He saved others. He can’t save himself!  (vs 32)Let the Messiah, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe him.” Those who were crucified with him also insulted him.  (vs 33)When the sixth hour had come (about noon), there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour, or approximately 3 P.M.  (vs 34)At the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, *“Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?”* which means, *“My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” *  (vs 35)Some stood by heard this and said, “Look! he is calling Elijah.”  (vs 36)One ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar. He put it on the end of a stick and offered it to Jesus to drink, saying, “Leave him alone. Let’s see whether Elijah comes to take him down!”  (vs 37)Jesus cried out with a loud voice, and breathed his last breath.  (vs 38)The temple curtain (that separated the Most Holy Place from the rest) was torn in two from the top to the bottom.  (vs 39)When the Roman centurion standing guard saw that Jesus cried out like this and then breathed his last breath, he said, “This man really was God’s Son!”  (vs 40)There were women watching from far away including Mary Magdalene, Mary (the mother of James the Younger and of Joseph), and Salome.  (vs 41)When Jesus was in Galilee, these women travelled with him and supported him. Also, many other women who came to Jerusalem with Jesus were there.  (vs 42)When evening arrived, because it was the Preparation Day—that is, the day before the Sabbath—  (vs 43)Joseph of Arimathaea boldly went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus’ body. (Joseph was a prominent council member who was also looking for God’s Kingdom.)  (vs 44)Pilate was surprised to hear that Jesus was already dead; and summoning the centurion, he asked him whether Jesus had been dead long.  (vs 45)After discussing this with the centurion, he granted Jesus’s body to Joseph.  (vs 46)Joseph bought a linen cloth, and taking him down, wound him in the linen cloth and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of a rock. He rolled a stone against the door of the tomb.  (vs 47)Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses, saw where he was laid. ﻿

## Chapter 16.

(vs 1)When the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome bought spices, that they might come and anoint him.  (vs 2)Very early on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb when the sun had risen.  (vs 3)They were saying among themselves, “Who will roll away the stone from the door of the tomb for us?”  (vs 4)for it was very big. Looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back.  (vs 5)Entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, dressed in a white robe; and they were amazed.  (vs 6)He said to them, “Don’t be amazed. You seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified. He has risen! He is not here. See the place where they laid him!  (vs 7)But go, tell his disciples and Peter, ‘He goes before you into Galilee. There you will see him, as he said to you.’”  (vs 8)They went out, and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had come on them. They said nothing to anyone; for they were afraid.  (vs 9)Now when he had risen early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.  (vs 10)She went and told those who had been with him, as they mourned and wept.  (vs 11)When they heard that he was alive and had been seen by her, they disbelieved.  (vs 12)After these things he was revealed in another form to two of them as they walked, on their way into the country.  (vs 13)They went away and told it to the rest. They didn’t believe them, either.  (vs 14)Afterward he was revealed to the eleven themselves as they sat at the table; and he reprimanded them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they didn’t believe those who had seen him after he had risen.  (vs 15)He said to them, “Go into all the world and preach the Good News to the whole creation.  (vs 16)He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who disbelieves will be condemned.  (vs 17)These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new languages;  (vs 18)they will take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it will in no way hurt them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover.”  (vs 19)So then the Lord, after he had spoken to them, was received up into heaven and sat down at the right hand of God.  (vs 20)They went out and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them and confirming the word by the signs that followed. Amen.

# Key to notes and extended markup

(sn "This is a note about the background context that would be common knowlege to Greek-speaking Jewish listeners at Mark's time. ")

(theme "A theme from this thing.") A study note highlighting a theme that Mark is developing in the text.  May be rendered as a tool tip for interactive use, typeset as a header (in a lighter typeface than the text), etc.

(tn "Translation note.") Alternative ways to translate a word or phrase. (Avoids textual criticism because of the audience.)

(vs 1) Verse 1, etc.

(xr John 1:1-14)

# Why and How?

## Mark update goals

This work seeks to render Mark's gospel in modern spoken English in a colloquiel and reverent style.  Here are some examples of what this means to this author:

-   Shorter sentences, fragments.
-   It’s okay to start a sentence with a connector.
-   And contractions are okay too.

At best, Greek word ordering is bad English style to native English speakers and is confusing to understand at worst. This reworking should respect principles of excellent English style while retaining the academic rigor present in the original ASV text.

The result should be immediately understandable by unchurched or lightly-churched individuals without eliminating challenges faced by all faithful interpreters of the Bible. Offensive or confusing things Jesus said and did are retained and not explained. And metaphors that Jesus or Mark used are retained because these add depth and dimension to their context that otherwise would be lost.  Also, many symbols and metaphors appear in a remarkably consistent way throughout the Bible so this author believes that retaining the symbols and metaphors is important to developing an understanding of the entire Bible.

## Method

Update the American Standard Version’s (ASV) rendering of Mark’s gospel. The ASV is a formal equivalence translation. Retain this rigor in the update within the structure of what would be considered excellent (if colloquial, spoken) English style. On the other hand, all translation work necessarily has an element of interpretation, particularly when a word in the source language does not have a direct equivalent in the target language. This is true even when translating from archaic English into modern spoken English. In these situations, switch to dynamic equivalence while remaining as close to formal equivalence as possible.

These goals can be in tension with each other. The following principles guide how I have resolved these tensions. I’ve included specific examples where needed to clearly explain a thought.

-   Don’t change the meaning; simply update the style of English to the goals above.
-   When appropriate, change to active voice. For example, in 1:26: “The unclean spirit convulsed the man, shrieked loudly, and came out of him.”
-   Simplify wording of lists to modern spoken English standards. 1:26 above is an example of this.
-   A single thought gets a single sentence. Closely-related thoughts or those utilizing parallelism get a single sentence with semicolons separating each thought.
-   Many times the English is confusing because Mark used pronouns excessively or the referent of an expression is unclear without carefully studying the grammar of the context. While this may be the way Mark wrote, this is not considered high-quality spoken or written English. Resolve pronouns and other referents to their antecedents when doing this yields a clearer and equally-accurate reading.
-   Use parentheses and hyphens (as appropriate) when a thought is interrupted by another one. Prefer using parentheses over rearranging word order.
-   Rearrange word order only judiciously and being careful to preserve the emphases each individual idea in a sentence receives.
-   If a direct or indirect object is separated from its referent, rearrange the word order to bring them together.
-   For example, 2:14: As he passed by the tax office, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus working there. Here the ASV (and presumably the Greek) separates “passed by” from its indirect object “the tax office” with the comment about meeting Levi there. Putting the IO next to its verb makes the sentence immediately more comprehensible to a modern reader and also clarifies the fact that Levi was a tax collector, clarifying the following story beginning in verse 18, without adding or removing from what was said as it was originally rendered in the ASV.
-   Don’t translate symbols or metaphors. The Bible expects a lot of its reader and that’s ok.
-   If a thing would be obvious to one of Mark’s original readers but not to a modern reader, clarify it using a parenthetical comment, hyphens, etc. Place these clarifications in italics to preserve accountability for these being added thoughts not present in the original.
-   Translate technical theological terms whenever necessary for comprehension among today’s largely-unchurched youth. In this sense, this work is a translation, but from English to English (with input from tools illuminating the original Greek).

### Examples of English-to-English translation

Repent / repentance: These words aren’t used at all in modern spoken English and especially not among our unchurched youth.

Sin: In colloquial use, this word simply means “a bad thing” or “a bad person”. But in common use today when the word is used at all it is frequently used in an ironic or sarcastic way. The effect is to change “sin” from an undesirable to a desirable thing—and sometimes even makes fun of the whole concept of sin to begin with.

Theologically this is beyond inaccurate. Further, we would never refer to someone as a “sinner” in spoken English (in the Bible sense of the word) outside a church. As a result, this author believes the word “sin” has completely lost its meaning in spoken English.

Consequently, in this instance I prefer to describe the general idea of “sin” rather than to use the word directly. But how? ”Sin” and “repent/repentance” are both very broad and general ideas that are developed throughout Scripture. Here are some principles I’ve used to resolve these difficulties.

1.  When these ideas first appear in Mark, they do so in a context that already illuminates those ideas. For example, when John preaches “a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins” it is in the context of *preparing the way*, of *making his roads straight.* In this context I believe it is accurate and fair to translate repentance as requiring people *to choose God’s path. *In other words, in a context like this we can simply let the Bible interpret itself.

2.  In context, repentance is the antidote to sin, but what is the essence of sin? How can we express it succinctly in a way that makes sense in context? Considering the weight of Scripture, sin isn’t not just disobedience. It can be done in ignorance. It can be simply an inappropriate motive, thought, or intention driving an action that is in itself not sinful. For this I searched the Scriptures to find other descriptions of sin, even if the word itself wasn’t spelled out, and landed in James 4, “you do not have because you do not ask, or because you ask with wrong motives, that you may spend what you get on your own pleasures.”

Of course, because different parts of languages change differently over time there are few absolutes regarding the best approach in specific instance. For example, in some contexts I have felt it more appropriate to include the theological term used in the text, but with a (usually parenthetical) elaboration or explanation in the context. In other cases, I have found that an English word that is closely related to the original word that hasn’t yet lost its meaning and connotation.

For example, our culture’s understanding of *faith* is more-or-less accurate if one disregards the notion that some people advocate the idea that faith is fundamentally an irrational thing. So the word *faith* itself may not be wise to use. But in common use, other words derived from *faith* remain *faithful* to the Bible meaning.

In situations like this, I have preferred to use a derived English expression or an explanation next to the word making its meaning clear in context.

### Additional principles

Retain Mark’s “overuse” of the word “immediately”. It is this author’s belief that Mark is intentionally using repetition to make a point.

When a global mechanical search-and-replace update works, use it to retain continuity with the underlying Greek when possible. For example: *Behold* → *Look!* Or: *multitude* → *large crowd; great multitude → very large crowd.*

Many modern bibles include section headers describing the events or ideas immediately following. And most do a pretty good job of remaining descriptive rather than interpreting the text. Since the intent of this work is to not just update the English rendering of Mark’s gospel but to help unchurched and new believers to understand how to be a disciple of Jesus, I have chosen to change this convention as follows:

-   Instead of including headers inline with the text, I have chosen to add vertical white space separating sections.
-   At the beginning of some sections I have included a footnote (marked using ^**th**^ as described in the footnote key) to a short phrase explaining a theme Mark is developing in the following story/thought in its context. These are intended to be similar to section headers in contemporary bibles, but as they offer commentary on the text are not included inline.
